=head1 Catalyst Advent - Day 10 - Catalyst on shared hosting

B<NOTE>: This article was written in 2005. Make sure to check the
Catalyst Wiki (L<http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/wiki>) for updated information.

So, you want to put your Catalyst app out there for the whole world to
see, but you don't want to break the bank. There is an answer - if you can
get shared hosting with FastCGI and a shell, you can install your Catalyst
app. First, run

  perl -MCPAN -e shell

and go through the standard CPAN configuration process. Then exit out
without installing anything. Next, open your .bashrc and add

  export PATH=$HOME/local/bin:$HOME/local/script:$PATH
  perlversion=`perl -v | grep 'built for' | awk '{print $4}' | sed -e 's/v//;'`
  export PERL5LIB=$HOME/local/share/perl/$perlversion:$HOME/local/lib/perl/$perlversion:$HOME/local/lib:$PERL5LIB

and log out, then back in again (or run ". .bashrc" if you prefer). Finally,
edit .cpan/CPAN/MyConfig.pm and add

  'make_install_arg' => qq[SITEPREFIX=$ENV{HOME}/local],
  'makepl_arg' => qq[INSTALLDIRS=site install_base=$ENV{HOME}/local],

Now you can install the modules you need with CPAN as normal, and perl will
pick them up. Finally, change directory into the root of your virtual host
and symlink your application's script directory in -

  cd path/to/mydomain.com
  ln -s ~/lib/MyApp/script script

And add the following lines to your .htaccess file (assuming the server is
setup to handle .pl as fcgi - you may need to rename the script to
myapp_fastcgi.fcgi and/or use a SetHandler directive) -

  RewriteEngine On
  RewriteCond %{REQUEST_URI} !^/?script/myapp_fastcgi.pl
  RewriteRule ^(.*)$ script/myapp_fastcgi.pl/$1 [PT,L]

http://mydomain.com/ should now Just Work. Congratulations, now you can
tell your friends about your new website (or in our case, tell the client
it's time to pay the invoice :)

  -- mst

=cut
