=head1 Catalyst Advent - Day 12 - L<Catalyst::Plugin::Subrequest>

B<NOTE>: This article was written in 2005. Make sure to check the
Catalyst Wiki (L<http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/wiki>) for updated information.

=head2 Component based sub-requests.

This is actually one of the features we brought over from L<Maypole>. There it 
was called L<Maypole::Plugin::Component>. Basically, the idea is to set up 
new request/response objects, and do an internal request, then return the 
output. It's quite handy for various situations, Simon's example was a 
shopping portal. I'm frequently using it to render parts of my site that I'm 
also rendering with ajax, to avoid duplication of code.

It's quite simple in use. You just call $c->subreq('</public/url>'); (or 
with TT, [% c.subreq('/public/url') %] .) This will localize enough 
of your request/response object so that it shouldn't affect your current
request, set up a new path/uri, and call the Dispatcher to force a full
request chain, including begin/end/auto/default and whatever else applies.
if you don't like 'subreq', theres an alias as well: 'sub_request'.

You can also set up the stash before the request, as well as pass parameters
to the request like a normal form POST by passing optional hashrefs to the 
subreq method. for example:

	my $text=$c->subreq('/foo',{ bar=>$c->stash->{bar} }, {id=>23});

This will dispatch to whatever handles '/foo', with bar in the stash, and
$c->req->param('id') returning 23.  After the request, $text will contain
whatever's in $c->res->output.

Note, by the way, that the uri path is relative to the application root, 
and not necessesarily the webserver root.


-- Marcus Ramberg

=cut
