=head1 Catalyst Advent - Day 14 - Authentication/Authorization

B<NOTE: This article is now obsolete.> Please refer to
L<http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/wiki/gettingstarted/howtos/interim_authorization_and_authentication_example>.

This is done in several steps:

=over 4

=item Verification

Getting the user to identify themselves, by giving you some piece of
information known only to you and the user. Then you can assume that the user
is who they say they are. This is called B<credential verification>.

=item Authorization

Making sure the user only accesses functions you want them to access. This is
done by checking the verified users data against your internal list of groups,
or allowed persons for the current page.

=back

=head1 Modules

The Catalyst Authentication system is made up of many interacting modules, to
give you the most flexibility possible.

=head2 Credential verifiers

A Credential module tables the user input, and passes it to a Store, or some
other system, for verification. Typically, a user object is created by either
this module or the Store and made accessible by a C<< $c->user >> call.

Examples:

 Password - Simple username/password checking.
 HTTPD    - Checks using basic HTTP auth.
 TypeKey  - Check using the typekey system.

=head2 Storage backends

A Storage backend contains the actual data representing the users. It is
queried by the credential verifiers. Updating the store is not done within
this system, you will need to do it yourself.

Examples:

 DBIC     - Storage using a database.
 Minimal  - Storage using a simple hash (for testing).

=head2 User objects

A User object is created by either the storage backend or the credential
verifier, and filled with the retrieved user information.

Examples:

 Hash     - A simple hash of keys and values.

=head2 ACL authorization

ACL stands for Access Control List. The ACL plugin allows you to regulate
access on a path by path basis, by listing which users, or roles, have access
to which paths.

=head2 Roles authorization

Authorization by roles is for assigning users to groups, which can then be
assigned to ACLs, or just checked when needed.

=head1 Logging in

When you have chosen your modules, all you need to do is call the C<<
$c->login >> method. If called with no parameters, it will try to find
suitable parameters, such as B<username> and B<password>, or you can pass it
these values.

=head1 Checking roles

Role checking is done by using the C<< $c->check_user_roles >> method, this will
check using the currently logged in user (via C<< $c->user >>). You pass it
the name of a role to check, and it returns true if the user is a member.

=head1 EXAMPLE

 use Catalyst qw/Authentication
                 Authentication::Credential::Password
                 Authentication::Store::Htpasswd
                 Authorization::Roles/;

 __PACKAGE__->config->{authentication}{htpasswd} = "passwdfile";

  sub login : Local {
     my ($self, $c) = @_;

     if (    my $user = $c->req->param("user")
         and my $password = $c->req->param("password") )
     {
         if ( $c->login( $user, $password ) ) {
              $c->res->body( "hello " . $c->user->name );
         } else {
            # login incorrect
         }
     }
     else {
         # invalid form input
     }
  }

  sub restricted : Local {
     my ( $self, $c ) = @_;

     $c->detach("unauthorized")
       unless $c->check_user_roles( "admin" );

     # do something restricted here
  }


=head1 More information

L<http://search.cpan.org/perldoc?Catalyst::Plugin::Authentication> has a longer explanation.


 --castaway
