=head1 Catalyst Advent - Day 15 - Sessions

When you have your users identified, you will want to somehow remember that
fact, to save them from having to identify themselves for every single
page. One way to do this is to send the username and password parameters in
every single page, but that's ugly, and won't work for static pages. 

Sessions are a method of saving data related to some transaction, and giving
the whole collection a single ID. This ID is then given to the user to return
to us on every page they visit while logged in. The usual way to do this is
using a browser cookie.

Catalyst uses two types of plugins to represent sessions:

=head2 State

A State module is used to keep track of the state of the session between the
users browser, and your application.  

A common example is the Cookie state module, which sends the browser a cookie
containing the session ID. It will use default value for the cookie name and
domain, so will "just work" when used. 

=head2 Store

A Store module is used to hold all the data relating to your session, for
example the users ID, or the items for their shopping cart. You can store data
in memory (FastMmap), in a file (File) or in a database (DBI).

=head1 Authentication magic

If you have included the session modules in your application, the
Authentication modules will automagically use your session to save and
retrieve the user data for you.

=head1 Using a session

Once the session modules are loaded, the session is available as C<<
$c->session >>, and can be writen to and read from as a simple hash reference.

=head1 EXAMPLE

  use Catalyst qw/
                 Session
                 Session::Store::FastMmap
                 Session::State::Cookie
                 /;


  ## Write data into the session

  sub add_item : Local {
     my ( $self, $c ) = @_;

     my $item_id = $c->req->param("item");

     push @{ $c->session->{items} }, $item_id;

  }

  ## A page later we retrieve the data from the session:

  sub get_items : Local {
     my ( $self, $c ) = @_;

     $c->stash->{items_to_display} = $c->session->{items};

  }


=head1 More information

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Catalyst-Plugin-Session>

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Catalyst-Plugin-Session-State-Cookie>

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Catalyst-Plugin-Session-State-URI>

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Catalyst-Plugin-Session-Store-FastMmap>

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Catalyst-Plugin-Session-Store-File>

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Catalyst-Plugin-Session-Store-DBI>


  --castaway
