=head1 Day 11 - Using Catalyst with Log4perl

Using Catalyst with Log4perl

=head2 Introduction

Log4perl is a Perl-based port of the popular Log4j library.  It provides 
a powerful and flexible addition to the built-in logging features that 
come with Catalyst.


=head2 Installation

If you don't already have
L<Catalyst::Log::Log4perl>
and its dependencies installed, do so now with:

    perl -MCPAN -e 'install Catalyst::Log::Log4perl'

Answer C<y> to any prompts about dependencies.


=head2 Create a Very Simple Application

Use the Catalyst helper to quickly throw up an application where
we can try out Log4perl:

    $ catalyst.pl MyApp
    created "MyApp"
    created "MyApp/script"
    created "MyApp/lib"
    created "MyApp/root"
    ...
    created "MyApp/script/myapp_create.pl"
    $ cd MyApp

Then create a basic controller called C<Test>:

    $ script/myapp_create.pl controller Test

You should now be able to launch the application in the development 
server:

    $ script/myapp_server.pl

Now point your web browser to L<http://127.0.0.1:3000> (substitute the
correct IP address if your development server is running on a 
different box than your web browser) and you should receive the standard 
Catalyst "welcome page."  If you surf to L<http://127.0.0.1:3000/test> 
you should receive a message similar to the following (the specific 
message could vary across versions of Catalyst):

    Matched MyApp::Controller::Test in Test.


=head2 Enable Log4perl

Open C<lib/MyApp.pm> and edit it to match:

    package MyApp;
    
    use strict;
    use warnings;
    
    use Catalyst::Runtime '5.70';
    
    # Use the Log4perl Catalyst component
    use Catalyst::Log::Log4perl;
    
    use Catalyst qw/-Debug ConfigLoader Static::Simple/;
    
    our $VERSION = '0.01';
    
    
    __PACKAGE__->config( name => 'MyApp' );
    
    
    # Create a Log4perl object
    __PACKAGE__->log( Catalyst::Log::Log4perl->new() );
    
    
    # Start the application
    __PACKAGE__->setup;
    
    1;

Two lines have been added above -- both are marked with comments about
Log4perl.  One includes the Catalyst Log4perl component and the other 
creates a new logging object.

Now restart the development server and reload the test page in your 
browser (you might need to Shift-Reload).  You should see start-up and 
page access log messages in your development server window.  However, 
note that the format of the messages is slightly different than what we 
observed earlier.  The current messages are generated with the default 
formatting for Log4perl (we will see how to modify the formatting in the 
next section).


=head2 Customizing Log4perl

First, let's create a Log4perl configuration file.  Use your editor to 
open a file called C<Log4perl.conf> in the base directory of your project
(the same directory where the C<myapp.yml> was created by the 
C<catalyst.pl> helper).  Enter the following text:

    # Define a logger that sends everything of DEBUG priority
    # or higher to the LOGFILE appender
    log4perl.rootLogger=DEBUG, LOGFILE
    # Appenders send log output to different locations
    # Here we send it to a file
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE=Log::Log4perl::Appender::File
    # Specify the file to log to
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.filename=test.log
    # 'append' is the default mode, but see docs for more options
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.mode=append
    # Use a PatternLayout to format the output
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.layout=PatternLayout
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.layout.ConversionPattern=[%d] [myapp] [%p] %m%n

We are using the L<Log::Log4perl::Appender::File>
appender to send the log output to a file.  See the documentation on 
L<Log::Log4perl::Appender::File> for a 
full list of the options available for this appender.

A C<PatternLayout> can be used to format the output of your logging 
messages (the C<PatternLayout> formatting is common across all 
appenders).  Here is a quick list of the formatting options supported by 
C<PatternLayout> (see 
L<Log::Log4perl::Layout::PatternLayout> 
for more detail):

    %c Category of the logging event.
    %C Fully qualified package (or class) name of the caller
    %d Current date in yyyy/MM/dd hh:mm:ss format
    %F File where the logging event occurred
    %H Hostname (if Sys::Hostname is available)
    %l Fully qualified name of the calling method followed by the
       callers source the file name and line number between 
       parentheses.
    %L Line number within the file where the log statement was issued
    %m The message to be logged
    %M Method or function where the logging request was issued
    %n Newline (OS-independent)
    %p Priority of the logging event
    %P pid of the current process 
    %r Number of milliseconds elapsed from program start to logging 
       event   
    %T A stack trace of functions called
    %% A literal percent (%) sign

Note that C<%F>, C<%l>, C<%L>, C<%M>, and C<%T> are relative to 
Catalyst.pm versus your code, and are therefore less useful in Catalyst 
applications.

Then tell the Log4perl constructor to read the configuration from the 
file created above by opening C<lib/MyApp.pm> and changing this line:

    __PACKAGE__->log( Catalyst::Log::Log4perl->new() );

to match:

    __PACKAGE__->log( Catalyst::Log::Log4perl->new(
        __PACKAGE__->path_to('Log4perl.conf')->stringify ) );

Now restart the development server as before and reload your browser.
Notice that you only receive the "You can connect..." line of output
from the development server.  If you then look at the contents of the
<test.log> file specified in the configuration file, you will see
output similar to that with the default Log4perl formatting.  
However, because we specified "[myapp]" in the C<ConversionPattern>,
you should notice that this has replaced the "[catalyst]" message from
the previous output.


=head2 Add Some Log Messages

Open C<lib/MyApp/Controller/Test.pm> in your editor and add the following
lines to C<index> method:

    sub index : Private {
        my ( $self, $c ) = @_;
    
        $c->log->debug("Starting method index");
        $c->log->info("Before body set");
        $c->response->body('Matched MyApp::Controller::Test in Test.');
        $c->log->warn("After body set");
        $c->log->error("A fake error");
        $c->log->fatal("A fake fatal error");
    }

Delete the C<test.log>, restart the development, and then reload your 
browser while at the L<http://127.0.0.1:3000/test> URL.  You should see 
lines similar to the following (the time/date fields have been shortened 
to "[...]" to avoid word wrapping):

    ...
    [...] [myapp] [INFO] MyApp powered by Catalyst 5.7006
    [...] [myapp] [INFO] *** Request 1 (0.200/s) [3503] [...] ***
    [...] [myapp] [DEBUG] "GET" request for "test" from "127.0.0.1"
    [...] [myapp] [DEBUG] Path is "test"
    [...] [myapp] [DEBUG] Starting method index
    [...] [myapp] [INFO] Before body set
    [...] [myapp] [WARN] After body set
    [...] [myapp] [ERROR] A fake error
    [...] [myapp] [FATAL] A fake fatal error
    [...] [myapp] [INFO] Request took 0.091537s (10.925/s)
    ...


=head2 Changing the Logging Level

Change the first non-comment line of the C<Log4perl.conf> file from:

    log4perl.rootLogger=DEBUG, LOGFILE

to:

    log4perl.rootLogger=WARN, LOGFILE

If you restart your server and reload the L<http://127.0.0.1:3000/test> 
URL in your browser, you should notice that the DEBUG and INFO-level 
messages have been suppressed from the output.  This is obviously a very 
useful feature when moving an application into production.  (Note that 
the development server dispatch and timing information is also 
suppressed when the level is set to WARN... they will return if you try 
the INFO level in your C<Log4perl.conf> file).


=head2 Sending Email on Log Events

One extremely useful features of Log4perl is that it can generate an 
email when things go really wrong with your application (or other events 
of interest occur).  In order to try this out, let's first install the 
C<Log::Dispatch::Email::MailSend> appender:

    perl -MCPAN -e 'install Log::Dispatch::Email::MailSend'

Then open the C<Log4perl.conf> file and edit it to match:

    # Define a logger that sends everything of WARN priority
    # or higher to the LOGFILE *AND* EMAIL appenders
    log4perl.rootLogger=WARN, LOGFILE, EMAIL
    # Appenders send log output to different locations
    # Here we send it to a file
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE=Log::Log4perl::Appender::File
    # Specify the file to log to
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.filename=test.log
    # 'append' is the default mode, but see docs for more options
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.mode=append
    # Use a PatternLayout to format the output
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.layout=PatternLayout
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.layout.ConversionPattern=[%d] [myapp] [%p] %m%n
    
    # Define the behavior of the EMAIL appender    
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL=Log::Dispatch::Email::MailSend
    # Set the the from and to email addresses here
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.from=myapp@mydomain.com
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.to=you@yourdomain.com
    # Customize the subject of the email
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.subject=MyApp Error
    # Use a different set of formatting options to PatternLayout
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.layout=PatternLayout
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.layout.ConversionPattern=%d %F %L %c - %m%n
    # Although the rootLogger has a level of WARN, we further
    # filter this appender with the Threshold option because
    # we only want emails to be sent for very severe issues
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.Threshold=FATAL
    # This is important if you want the emails to be sent right away
    # vs. log4perl wait for multiple messages to send in a single email
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.buffered=0

Use your email address in place of C<you@yourdomain.com> and place
something reasonable in C<myapp@mydomain.com>.  

Now when you restart the development server and reload your browser
you should receive an email for the C<FATAL> log message (assuming
email is enabled for your machine -- if not, take a look at your
mail logs for evidence of the attempt to send an email).


=head2 Sending Logging Output To the Screen

Use can use 
L<Log::Log4perl::Appender::Screen> 
to also send the log messages to STDERR or STDOUT of the window running 
the development server. To do this, edit the C<Log4perl.conf> file and 
modify it to match the following (only the top and bottom few lines have 
changed):

    # Define a logger that sends everything of DEBUG priority
    # or higher to the LOGFILE, EMAIL *AND* SCREEN appenders
    log4perl.rootLogger=DEBUG, LOGFILE, EMAIL, SCREEN
    # Appenders send log output to different locations
    # Here we send it to a file
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE=Log::Log4perl::Appender::File
    # Specify the file to log to
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.filename=test.log
    # 'append' is the default mode, but see docs for more options
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.mode=append
    # Use a PatternLayout to format the output
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.layout=PatternLayout
    log4perl.appender.LOGFILE.layout.ConversionPattern=[%d] [myapp] [%p] %m%n
    
    # Define the behavior of the EMAIL appender    
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL=Log::Dispatch::Email::MailSend
    # Set the the from and to email addresses here
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.from=myapp@mydomain.com
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.to=you@yourdomain.com
    # Customize the subject of the email
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.subject=MyApp Error
    # Use a different set of formatting options to PatternLayout
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.layout=PatternLayout
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.layout.ConversionPattern=%d %F %L %c - %m%n
    # Although the rootLogger has a level of WARN, we further
    # filter this appender with the Threshold option because
    # we only want emails to be sent for very severe issues
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.Threshold=FATAL
    # This is important if you want the emails to be sent right away
    # vs. log4perl wait for multiple messages to send in a single email
    log4perl.appender.EMAIL.buffered=0
    
    # Default the SCREEN appender to output to STDERR
    log4perl.appender.SCREEN=Log::Log4perl::Appender::Screen
    # Use the SimpleLayout
    log4perl.appender.SCREEN.layout=Log::Log4perl::Layout::SimpleLayout

Logging to STDERR is now added to the output previously seen on the 
LOGFILE and EMAIL appenders.


=head2 Logging Perl's Warnings

You can also have Catalyst send warnings in other parts of the code
to your logs.  To enable this, edit C<lib/MyApp.pm> and add the
following lines:

    # Handle warnings from Perl as fatal log messages
    $SIG{__WARN__} = sub { __PACKAGE__->log->fatal(@_); };

Then add the following somewhere inside the C<index> method of
C<lib/MyApp/Controller/Test.pm>:

    warn "Test warning";

If you then restart the development server and reload your browser you 
should see a FATAL log message that corresponds to the testing warnings 
added above.  (Thanks to Dan Dascalescu for suggesting this tip.)


=head2 More Information

Log4perl is a very flexible logging framework; to learn more, check out
the following links:

=over 4

=item *

The Log4perl home page:
L<http://log4perl.sourceforge.net/>

=item *

A nice tutorial on Log4perl (not specific to Catalyst):
L<http://www.perl.com/pub/a/2002/09/11/log4perl.html>

=item *

FAQ:
L<http://log4perl.sourceforge.net/releases/Log-Log4perl/docs/html/Log/Log4perl/FAQ.html>

=item *

Examples:
L<http://lena.franken.de/perl_hier/log4perl.html>

=back


=head3 AUTHOR

Kennedy Clark <hkclark@gmail.com>

=head3 COPYRIGHT.

Copyright 2006 Kennedy Clark.  This document can be freely
redistributed and can be modified and re-distributed under the same
conditions as Perl itself.

