=head1 Day 13 - Adding Custom Headers

Adding Headers to help with Search Engine Results

=head2 Headers and Google

A while ago we noticed our site was slipping from Google after we switched 
over to Catalyst. Strange. Nothing had changed much content-wise, but we 
realised that our headers had. 

We also have a few other domains pointing to our main site, so after
changing them to B<301> Redirects (and not B<302>), and with the help
of our new headers, we were soon back to where we were before (if not
better).

Let's tell you how!

=head2 $c-E<gt>response-E<gt>headers-E<gt>header()

C<< $c->response->headers->header() >> is the main method we'll be adding 
to, so what do we need?

Well, we looked around at some of the bigger sites like http://www.bbc.co.uk, 
http://www.redhat.com etc. and did:

    HEAD -S http://www.bbc.co.uk

The main thing we noticed was that we had a missing B<Last-Modified> header.

=head2 Creating a Last-Modified Header

As our site is a mixture of static and random content, we decided to 
use the last time our *.tt templates we modified, as this is the static text. 

Adding the B<Last-Modified> header is quite easy using the power of B<Template 
Toolkit>.

In every content template, simply C<USE> the date plugin e.g.:

    [% PROCESS base/header.tt %]
    [% USE date %] 

    <h1>My Content Page</h1> 

    [% PROCESS base/footer.tt %]    

Then in your C<footer.tt>:

    [% SET lastmod = date.format(template.modtime,
                                 format => '%a, %d %b %Y %H:%M:%S GMT',
                                 locale => en_GB, ) %] 	

    [% c.stash.modtime = lastmod %]                 

    <p class="updated">Page Last Updated: [% lastmod %]</p>                 
    <!-- footer END --> 

You can see we are using the B<date> plugin in the content template,
which pulls in the C<modtime> from I<that> template, and not the
B<footer.tt> or B<header.tt>. Then, from within the template, we put
this value into our stash to use in our B<Root.pm> Controller.

=head2 Adding the Header

Now we need to get this into your B<Root.pm>:

    =head2 end

    =cut

    sub end : ActionClass('RenderView') {
        my ( $self, $c ) = @_;

        # Forward to View unless response body is already defined
        $c->forward( $c->view('TT') )
          unless $c->response->body
          || $c->response->status =~ /^3\d\d$/;

        # Set our headers

        # Last-Modified
        my $modtime = $c->stash->{modtime}; # set in template

        $c->response->headers->header(
            'X-Powered-By'  => "Catalyst/" . Catalyst->VERSION,
            'Last-Modified' => $modtime,
        );
    }

Simple!

We hope that's given you some things to think about. Have fun! ;-)

=head2 Warning

Please make sure you understand what headers do before implementing this
technique, and what your site needs. If in doubt, use a search engine or
speak to the Catalyst community. Thanks!

=head3 AUTHOR

Gavin Henry B<ghenry@suretecsystems.com>

=head3 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2006 Suretec Systems Ltd. - http://www.suretecsystems.com

This document can be freely redistributed and can be modified and 
re-distributed under the same conditions as Perl itself.

=cut

