=head1 Catalyst Advent Day 14 - Job Queue

Running a job queue

=head2 What's a job queue?

A Job Queue enables you to run code at a fixed time interval (like
C<cron> does on Unix, C<launchd> on Mac OS X and "Scheduled Tasks" on
Windows). The job in this example runs as a HTTP request, so
you can reuse your Catalyst application code.

=head2 Get Started

Export the L<Catalyst::Engine::JobQueue::POE> source into a working
directory:

  $ svn export http://dev.catalyst.perl.org/repos/Catalyst/trunk/Catalyst-Engine-JobQueue-POE

We use C< svn export > instead of C< svn checkout > so that you don't
clutter up a working copy with the files created in the module build
process.

Build and install the engine:

  $ cd Catalyst-Engine-JobQueue-POE
  $ perl Makefile.PL
  $ make test 
  $ sudo make install

You can now use the job queue in your application.

=head2 Setup and Configure a JobQueue

Generate a new Catalyst application in another directory:

  $ catalyst.pl JobQueueApp
  <...lots of "created" messages>
  $ cd JobQueueApp
  $ script/jobqueueapp_create.pl JobQueue::POE
  <... a few "created" messages>
  
Now you have all you need to run the job queue, let's configure
it. Add the following configuration values to the F<jobqueueapp.yml>
configuration file:

  Catalyst::Engine::JobQueue::POE:
    schedule_file: crontab
    render: 
      to: [log]

This will make the job queue render the job responses to the application log.

=head2 Create your first job

It's time to create a job. Edit the F<crontab> file in the application
root and uncomment the last line (the one with the many "*"). Each
uncommented line represents a job. The first 6 elements will determine
how often the job will be run (it's in crontab syntax,
L<http://www.adminschoice.com/docs/crontab.htm#Crontab file>). The
next one is unused for now, so you can ignore it. The last one
represents the request that the job will send to the application:
It's the path part of a URL. The job looks like this:

  *   *   *   *   *   *   root   /test/job

This means that every minute, the job queue will make a request for
C</test/job>

=head2 Run the JobQueue

You can now run the job queue with:
  
  $ perl script/jobqueueapp_jobqueue.pl

You should see the typical Catalyst debug output. If you now wait for
60 seconds, you will see some more debug info (indicating that a
request is being processed) along with the HTML source of the default
Catalyst welcome page. It's the same output that your browser would
receive if you'd start the Catalyst web server and point it at the
server and the C</test/job> URL.

=head2 Getting mail

It's time to get some results by email. In the F<jobqueueapp.yml>
configuration file, change C<log> to C<email> and add these lines
underneath:

    email:
      from: catalyst@myserver.com
      to: user@myserver.com

Pay attention to the YAML alignment (C<email> should be vertically
aligned with C<to: [log]>).  Put your email address on the C<to> line
and the address that you want to see the mail report coming from on
the C<from> line. I<IMPORTANT> For this feature, the development
machine should be able to send emails by direct SMTP, if not add a
line like this to the config: smtp: mail.myserver.com

Again C<smtp> should be vertically aligned with C<to:
user@myserver.com>. Put your SMTP server on this line.

Re-run the job queue. This time, you should receive an email with the
default Catalyst page shortly after the full minute). Don't forget to
stop the job queue or else your inbox will fill up pretty quickly.

=head2 Write a useful job 

Now let's actually do something useful with the job. We'll setup a
controller which will tell us the system load. The URL for this info
will be C</system/load>.

First create the controller:

  $ script/jobqueueapp_create.pl controller System
  <... some "created"/"exists" messages>

Then edit F<lib/JobQueueApp/Controller/System.pm> and add this code:

  sub load : Local {
    my ( $self, $c ) = @_;
    my @output = `w`;
    $c->response->body("Load: $output[0]");
  }

I<IMPORTANT> This will only work if you have access to the C<w>
command line application. Under Windows or in restricted environment
you might not get any information.

Now edit the F<crontab> file so that the line you uncommented earlier
looks like this:

  */5   *   *   *   *   *   root   /system/load

and in the application configuration file change the C<to: [email]>
line to C<to: [log, email]>.

Now start the job queue and every 5 minutes the uptime, user count and
load averages will be logged as well as sent to you by mail.

=head2 Summary

As you have seen you can setup the job queue to run any action from
the controllers and have the results logged and/or mailed to you.

Keep in mind though that the engine is not yet production quality and
not recommended for running critical jobs.  However expect a CPAN
release for the job queue engine soon.

=head3 AUTHOR

Gruen Christian-Rolf (kixx) <kiki@bsdro.org> (author of this article and the
engine)

=head3 COPYRIGHT.

Copyright 2006 Grün Christian-Rolf.  This document can be freely
redistributed and can be modified and re-distributed under the same
conditions as Perl itself.

=cut 
