=head1 Day 20 - Catalyst::Plugin::Flavour

Adding Sweet Flavours to Catalyst Controllers

=head1 Introduction

Have you ever thought about how to handle multiple
templates (or views) from one controller?

Plugin::Flavour provides it to you, as "flavour".

If you use Flavour plugin, then a request for

    http://example.com/path/to/action.flavour

is handled by C</path/to/action> and the "flavour" is stored in
C<< $c->flavour >>.

Now you can use multiple views in one controller like this:

    $c->forward( $c->view( $c->flavour ) );

MAGIC!

=head1 Simple tutorial

Load plugin:

    use Catalyst qw/Flavour/;

Next up is configuration. If you use ConfigLoader, you edit
myapp.yml:

    flavour:
      default_flavour: html

C< default_flavour > is used when request url has no flavour part.
The default value is 'html', so you don't have to write it when you
use 'html' as the C<default_flavour>.

Before we forget, create L<Catalyst::View::TT|View::TT>.  Please run
C< ./script/myapp_create.pl view TT TT > before continuing.

The next step is to write controllers.  In this case, I'll have an html and
a json flavour.

Controller code:

    # MyApp::Controller::Root
    sub index : Private {
        my ( $self, $c ) = @_;
        $c->stash->{template} = 'index.' . $c->flavour;
    }

    sub end : ActionClass('RenderView') {}

Then write two templates.

index.html:

    <html>
     <head>
      <title>This is HTML</title>
     </head>
     <body>
      <h1>This is HTML!</h1>
     </body>
    </html>

index.json:

    {title:"This is JSON!"}

Well done!

When you run this app in the development server,

L<http://localhost:3000/index.html> shows index.html,

L<http://localhost:3000/index.json> shows index.json,

and http://localhost:3000/ shows index.html (the default flavour)


=head1 Path to controller mapping

Here is list of path to controller mapping used by Plugin::Flavour.

=over 4

=item C</> | C</index> | C</index.html>

    /index

=item C</action> | C</action.html>

    /action

=item C</path/to/> | C</path/to/index> | C</path/to/index.html>

    /path/to/index

=item C</path/to> | C</path/to.html>

    /path/to

=back

The last slash is important!  Suggestions and patchs are welcome for
this mapping!


=head1 Accessors for real path

Plugin::Flavour replace C<< $c->request->uri >> and C<< $c->request->path >> 
for tricking the Catalyst dispatcher.  It provides additional
accessor C<< $c->request->real_uri >> and C<< $c->request->real_path >>
for the actual uri and path.

=head1 AUTHOR

Daisuke Murase (typester) <typester@cpan.org>

=head3 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2006 Daisuke Murase.

This document can be freely redistributed and can be modified and 
re-distributed under the same conditions as Perl itself.

