Title:   The Other Kind of Turkey
Format:  Pod
Package: Games::Bowling::Scorecard

=head1 It's Elf Bowling Time Again

Every year, as Christmas approaches, it's time once again to update our email
filters to bitbucket all the "elf bowling!!!" emails from friends and family.
I've never understood the appeal of F<ELFBOWL.EXE>, but I guess I can say one
thing for it:  it gets me thinking about bowling, again.  I used to really
enjoy bowling, but I haven't gone out to the lanes in ages.  Living in New
England made me stop thinking about it much, because almost all bowling up
there is of a L<strange, abominable
variation|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candlepin_bowling>.

When the Nintendo Wii came out, though, I got hooked on bowling again, and
realized that although I had always enjoyed the game, I really never understood
how to score it.  What better way to learn than to implement a CPAN module for
tracking bowling scores?  Probably many, but that's the one I picked!

Here's the sort of scorecard I might get to fill out on a good day.  (I said I
liked bowling, not that I was good at it!)

  #!perl
  use Games::Bowling::Scorecard;

  my $card = Games::Bowling::Scorecard->new;

  $card->record(6,1);  # slow start 
  $card->record(7,2);  # getting better
  $card->record(10);   # strike! 
  $card->record(9,1);  # picked up a spare

  $card->record(10) for 1 .. 3; # turkey!

  $card->record(0,0);  # clearly distracted by something
  $card->record(8,2);  # amazingly picked up 7-10 split

  $card->record(10, 9, 1); # pick up a bonus spare

  say $card->score; # 156

If you're a much better bowler, you might get to make this excellent
invocation:

  #!perl
  my $card = Games::Bowling::Scorecard->new;
  $card->record( (10) x 12 );

  say $card->score; # 300

  $alley->trigger_balloon_drop;

=head2 Displaying Score Cards

Of course, printing a number to the screen isn't very satisfying.  Part of the
joy of bowling is watching all the bizarre math and symbols get drawn on the
big overhead screen.  We could tack this onto my game above...

  #!perl
  use Games::Bowling::Scorecard::AsText;

  print Games::Bowling::Scorecard::AsText->card_as_text($card);

And we'll get this extremely satisfying output:

  +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+
  | 6 1 | 7 2 | X   | 9 / | X   | X   | X   | - - | 8 / | X 9 / |
  |   7 |  16 |  36 |  56 |  86 | 106 | 116 | 116 | 136 |   156 |

=head2 Practical Uses..?

If you know how to bowl, you probably know how to keep score, so you're not
going to be saving a lot of time by keying in your scores to a Perl program.
You could easily enough throw together a ReadLine-based program to keep track
of turns and scores, but I think those uses are never going to be big wins over
transparencies and grease pencils.

No, I think that the big hot application for Games::Bowling::Scorecard will
come with the growing resurgence of L<SDL Perl|http://sdl.perl.org>.  Pretty
soon, dozens of graphical bowling games written in Perl will be in the works,
and they'll all be easier to write thanks to Games::Bowling::Scorecard.  I look
forward to the day when the F<ELFBOWL2.EXE> that I angrily delete is compiled
from Perl, using my own code.
