Title:   Valid Data to All Nations
Format:  Pod
Package: Data::Rx

=head1 Params::Validate is Okay

The CPAN has quite a few data validation libraries on it.  There's
L<Params::Validate>, L<Data::FormValidator>, and probably at least fifty
others.  Maybe a lot more.  I've used a dozen or so of them.  Some of them
stink, some of them are pretty good.  They are, unsurprisingly, pretty
Perlocentric.  It's useful, in Perl, to be able to say "I'm expecting an
instance of a class that does this interface" or "this part of the data should
be a regular expression" or "test this data with a custom callback."

The problem with this kind of validator is that it leads to business rules
that are only expressible in Perl, or that require substantial
post-implementation analysis to translate them into other languages.  A while
ago, I started to really want to valdiate data in both Perl and JavaScript,
specifically data that I was handing back and forth between a Perl web service
and two clients, written in Perl and JavaScript.  I wanted to be able to
validate the I/O in JavaScript, but writing all my validation twice looked like
a huge pain that would lead to not wanting to validate at all.  I decided I'd
look for schema languages.

I found XML Schema and RELAX NG and a few others meant for XML, but they really
didn't make a lot of sense for the data structures common to the batch of
dynamic programming languages I wanted to support.  They were very XML
oriented, which is fine, because they were supposed to be.  I also found
Kwalify and JSON Schema, neither of which seemed really well done to me, for
one reason or another.  After some token pleading with friends ("Please talk me
out of writing a schema system!") I decided to write my own.

=head1 Rx Schema

The Rx Schema system is very simple.  It's meant to be easy to extend with your
own datatypes, but to guarantee only a small set of core types that map to core
datatypes in many common languages.  We can start with this data structure
(shown here as Perl):

  #!perl
  my $data = {
    'Armand Assante' => { disposition => 'nice', present => 'Wii'   },
    'Ricardo Signes' => { disposition => 'nice', present => 'Sleep' },
    'Violet Beauregarde' => { disposition => 'naughty' },

    ...
  };

We'll make a slightly tortured schema for this, just to show off a few things.
Here, I'm representing the schema in L<YAML|http://yaml.org> for readability,
but they're really just data structures.  You could write it in Perl.  I
usually use JSON.

=begin vim yaml

  ---
  type: //map
  values:
    type: //any
    of  :
      - type: //rec
        required: disposition: { type: //str, value: 'naughty' }
      - type: //rec
        required:
          present: //str
          disposition: { type: //str, value: 'nice' }

=end vim

In other words, we require a hashref.  Each value is a hashref with either one
or two entries.  One must be disposition.  If it's naughty, there will be no
other entries.  If it's "nice" there must be an entry for present, which must
be a string.

It's easy to use this schema to validate things:

  #!perl
  use Data::Rx;

  my $schema = Data::Rx->new->make_schema( $that_structure_above );

  unless ($schema->check($input)) {
    die "invalid input!";
  }

But the whole point was to have this work in many languages, and it does:

=begin vim javascript

  var rx = new Rx;
  var schema = Rx.makeSchema( structure );

  unless (schema.check( input )) {
    throw "invalid input!";
  }

=end vim

...or...

=begin vim ruby

  require 'Rx'

  rx = Rx.new
  schema = Rx.make_schema( structure )

  unless schema.check( input )
    throw "invalid input!";
  end

=end vim

There are other implementations, too.

The Rx schema system is easy to extend.  If you want to use regular expressions
you can use the PCRE extension, which many language will be able to implement,
then you can write:

=begin vim yaml

  #!perl
  ---
  type: /pcre/str
  regex: '\A867-[5309]{4}\z'

=end yaml

=head1 Coming Features (or: Missing Features)

Right now, the various releases of Rx can only check whether or not something
is valid.  Obviously it's much more useful to be able to know I<why> something
isn't valid, if it fails.  This is being implemented (in the C<struct-fail>
branch), although development has been on hold while I work on some other
projects.  Once that works, Rx Schema will be much more useful.

I've often talked about other ideas that could built atop Rx like RPC, URI
templating, and API library autogeneration.  Although I'd love to work on them,
I think it's time to admit that I don't see them happening in the near future
unless somebody decides to really push for it.  For now, a portable schema
language is all I'm aiming for -- and I think that's enough for me!

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [Rx Schema|http://rjbs.manxome.org/rx]
* [Data::Rx]
* [Data::Rx::TypeBundle::Perl]
