Title:   Glory to Pod in the Highest
Package: Pod::Weaver

=head1 Glory?  To Pod?

Oh, I don't know.  I have really mixed feelings about Pod.  It's really easy to
write, most of the time, and the toolchain for it is pretty fantastic.  You
can convert Pod to text, man pages, HTML, LaTeX, PDF, and all kinds of other
formats.  Then again, there's too much vertical whitespace.  Lists are a
colossal pain to write.  Beyond the annoyances of Pod itself, the Pod of Perl
modules uploaded to the CPAN is expected to contain a bunch of boring filler
that gets copied around.

A number of other documentation systems tempted me with the idea of writing
less and getting information, like "this bit of documentation associates with
this method," giving you things like Python's C<help> builtin.  I set about
finding a way to write a lot less Pod that would tell me a lot more about my
code and look indistinguishable to consumers.  There were a few stops and
starts and a lot of spun-off code, and a very motivating grant from The Perl
Foundation.  The end result was L<Pod::Weaver>, which is something like a
templating system for Pod.

=head1 Pod Templates with Pod::Weaver

Like L<Email::MIME::Kit>, though, Pod::Weaver doesn't just take a document and
fill in strings.  It takes a description of the goal output and tries to build
something matching that description.  For example, here's roughly the default
template for Pod::Weaver:

=begin vim dosini

  [@CorePrep]

  [Name]
  [Version]

  [Region  / prelude]

  [Generic / SYNOPSIS]
  [Generic / DESCRIPTION]
  [Generic / OVERVIEW]

  [Collect / ATTRIBUTES]
  command = attr

  [Collect / METHODS]
  command = method

  [Leftovers]

  [Region  / postlude]

  [Authors]
  [Legal]

=end vim

This describes the document to be created; every section of the configuration
will try to produce a section in the output Pod, except for C<@CorePrep>, which
is a I<plugin bundle>, which could provide a bunch of sections or other kinds
of plugins.  In the case of CorePrep, we're adding plugins to ensure that we
have an object tree that's something like what we expect from a Pod document,
as Pod::Elemental starts with a very bare-bones structure that can be
tedious to work with.

After that, we try to make sure there are NAME and VERSION sections, then we
look for prelude region, and so on.  The input document might look like this:

=begin vim pod

  package Tree::Christmas;
  # ABSTRACT: a binary tree decorated with baubles and popcorn

  =begin :prelude

  =head1 WARNING

  This code may cause your home to smell like pine needles.

  =end :prelude

  =head1 DESCRIPTION

  This library provides a framework for hanging tinsel, popcorn, and other
  forms of garland.  In some locales, pickles may also be nested in a
  Tree::Christmas.

  =method ignite_lights

  This method...

  =method new

  ...

  =attr pickle_jar

  This is an arrayref of pickles.

=end vim

If we want to include things like a name, version, license, and author in the
output, we'll need to provide those.  We'll do that with something like this:

  #!perl
  my $input_pod = Pod::Elemental->read_string( $the_sample_above );

  my $weaver = Pod::Weaver->new_with_default_config;

  my $output_pod = $weaver->weave_document({
    authors => [ 'Ricardo Signes <rjbs@example.com>' ],
    license => Software::License::Perl_5->new({ ... }),
    version => '1.234',
    pod_document => $input_pod,
    ppi_document => $input_ppi, # (don't worry, keep reading)
  });

That gets us a new Pod::Elemental::Document which, when turned into a Pod
stirng, looks something like this:

=begin vim pod

  =head1 NAME

  Tree::Christmas - a binary tree decorated with baubles and popcorn

  =head1 VERSION

  version 1.234

  =head1 WARNING

  This code may cause your home to smell like pine needles.

  =head1 DESCRIPTION

  This library provides a framework for hanging tinsel, popcorn, and other
  forms of garland.  In some locales, pickles may also be nested in a
  Tree::Christmas.

  =head1 ATTRIBUTES

  =head2 pickle_jar

  This is an arrayref of pickles.

  =head1 METHODS

  =head2 ignite_lights

  This method...

  =head2 new

  ...

  =head1 AUTHORS

    Ricardo Signes <rjbs@example.com>

  =head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

  This document is copyright (C) 1991, Ricardo Signes.

  This document is available under the blah blah blah.

=end vim

Not bad!  We avoid typing nearly half of the output document, by lines -- and
that's only part of the benefit.  If we have five modules in our distribution,
all that boilerplate is added everywhere for us, so multiply that savings
across all our modules.  Then, if ever we want to change our license or add an
author or even change the overall layout of the output document, we only need
to change our inputs.

If you're wondering about the C<ppi_document> input above, it's because some
sections can be built by analyzing the Perl content of the document, so you can
automatically document things like included packages, defined subroutines, and
so on.  (You could also write something to compile the code and look at the
symbol table or meta layer, although no one has done that yet!)  Because "load
a F<.pm> file, break it into Pod and Perl, rewrite the Pod, and write it back
out" is such a common pattern, there's even L<Pod::Elemental::PerlMunger> that
takes care of everything but the "rewrite the Pod" step for you, leaving you
free to focus on configuring your weaver or other rewriting tool.

That's the interface on which L<Dist::Zila::Plugin::PodWeaver> is built.  It
gets all its inputs from your Dist::Zilla configuration and then rewrites all
your Perl modules with Pod::Weaver.  If you're using Dist::Zilla, all you need
to do to get all the rewriting seen above is add the line L<[PodWeaver]> into
your F<dist.ini>.

=head1 Extending Pod::Weaver

Pod::Weaver tries to make it add new behavior.  For example, a simple plugin to
add an "Acknowledgements" section is only about a dozen lines of code.  A
plugin to integrate Pod::Weaver with L<Pod::WikiDoc> is only about six lines of
code.  This allows the transformation of the easy to type:

=begin vim pod

  =for wikidoc
  * bell
  * book
  * candle

=end vim

...into the grumble-inducing:

=begin vim pod

  =over 2

  =item *

  bell

  =item *

  book

  =item *

  candle

  =back

=end vim

A recurring theme of this set of articles has been my hatred for needless
typing and boilerplate content, and Pod::Weaver has gone a long way to letting
me avoid both.  Hopefully you can use it to avoid them now, too, and spend more
time solving problems.

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [Pod::Weaver]
* [Pod::Elemental] - the Pod object model on which Weaver is built
* [Pod::Eventual] - the event-based parser behind Pod::Elemental
* [Dist::Zilla::Plugin::PodWeaver]
* [Dist::Zilla::Plugin::PodPurler] - a pale imitation/prototype of PodWeaver
* [Pod::Elemental::PerlMunger] - for writing your own Pod-in-Perl rewriter
* [Pod::WikiDoc] - David Golden's excellent wiki-like Pod dialect
* [Pod::Weaver::PluginBundle::RJBS] - how I weave my Pod
