Title:   Restoring The Traditions of our Forefathers
Package: Git::Fingerd

=head1 The War on "Finger"

I'll admit it:  I am a traditionalist.  I believe in honoring the protocols
that were left to us by our forefathers.  Maybe that makes me "old-fashioned"
or "short sighted" or "terminally irrelevant," but I see no reason I should
have to abandon technologies that have existed for 30 years just because they
are "horrible" and "obsolete" and "full of security holes."  What does HTTP
really give us over Gopher?  Why should I use BitTorrent instead of FTP?  How
is Wave any better than L<Ytalk|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ytalk>?

...and then there's L<finger|http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc742.html>.  People try
to replace finger more than anything else.  First "the home page" and then
"MySpace" and "Classmates" and now I think the hot new thing is "Orkut."  Well,
the F<.plan> file will live forever in my heart.

I wanted to provide a suitable tribute to my favorite ancient protocol, and
what better way than to pair it up with one of the trendy technologies that I
I<do> enjoy.  L<Git|http://git-scm.com/> might only be relevant for a short
while, but it's giving us all kinds of good ideas to backport to
L<Arch|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_arch>.

=head1 Finger My Git

L<Git::Fingerd> is a L<Net::Finger::Server>-powered repository information
delivery platform that allows you to easily access information about a server's
git repositories from any finger-enabled operating system like Mac OS X.
Here you can see the result of fingering one of my git servers:

  ~$ finger @git.codesimply.com
  [zodiac.codesimply.com]
  Repository                          Description
  Acme-Canadian                       Canooks in your code, eh?
  Acme-Lingua-EN-Inflect-Modern       modernize Lingua::EN::Inflect rule's
  Acme-ProgressBar                    a simple progress bar for the patient
  Acme-Studly                         convertBetween various_well_known Id...
  Amce-CNA                            a moer tolernat verison of mehtod lo...
  App-Addex                           generate mail tool configuration fro...
  App-Addex-AddressBook-Abook         use the "abook" program as the addex...
  [ ... ]

If I want to learn more about a repository, it's easy:

  ~$ finger Rx@git.codesimply.com
  [zodiac.codesimply.com]
  Project  : Rx
  Desc.    : simple, extensible schemata
  Clone URL: git://git.codesimply.com/Rx.git

  [heads]
  master          = 38633c138f2c149ccbb7434a711975173f51a6ca
  struct-fail     = 4c8449e0693c4bac3033c8f093be6bf26a54ac34

  [tags]
  0.003           = b0ecc50fed4e6e84c6350cd12d9be33de926bebb
  0.004           = e625d75cfae4f43f51e43491b2b184a8396b8d50
  perl-0.001      = 602b746868d227e0a72144e6677b0d4a14a668cd
  perl-0.002      = 4b3102379609957b0ca2202f47a7a050ad6c42ee

=head1 The Future!

As time goes on, we can forwardport more ancient protocols into the future,
making sure that the future is just as technologically advanced as the past!
Imagine using L<Net::GitHub> and
L<Gopher::Server|http://search.cpan.org/dist/Gopher-Server/> to create a Gopher
interface to L<Github|http://github.com/>!  C<git push> via UUCP, or C<git
clone> across telnet!  The future will be so bright that we'll have to wear
Wayfarers.

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [Git::Fingerd]
* [Net::Finger::Server]
* [Net::Finger]
* [Git::PurePerl]
