Title:   One Last Present, All Boxed Up
Package: Task::BeLike::RJBS

=head1 It's Boxing Day!

Boxing day, the day after Christmas, is so called because it is the time of
year when you take all the gifts you received I<and liked> and put them in a
box to keep.  The rest you give to someone who couldn't be bothered to show up
for Christmas with the rest of the family.  It is also known as St. Stephen's
day, in honor of my brother.

=head1 What's in Ricardo's Box?

I maintain a box of my favorite presents from the CPAN.  Some of them are my
own donations, already mentioned this month.  Plenty of them were shared with
the CPAN by other contributors.  This box is L<Task::BeLike::RJBS>.  It's a
L<Task> distribution, which means that it doesn't actually do anything on its
own.  It's just a pile of prerequisites.  Instead of installing each one, you
can install the task and the rest are installed for you.

When I set up a new workstation, the first thing I do is compile my own recent
F<perl> to avoid any weird vendor packaging issues.  The next thing I do is
install Task::BeLike::RJBS.  Whether or not I<you> want to be like me, I'm
stuck with it, so I try to do it as efficiently as possible.

If you're interested in the modules that I consider essential to getting work
done, check out the task and its contents.

=head1 Building Your Own Box

Task::BeLike::RJBS is built with Dist::Zilla -- specifically with
L<Dist::Zilla::Plugin::TaskWeaver>, a plugin for building tasks.  To use
TaskWeaver, you just write a module with some Pod like this:

=begin vim pod

  =pkgroup Simple Modules (Wednesdays)

  =pkg Number::Nary 0.108 has robust unique-decodability detection

  =pkg Data::Section

  =pkg String::RewritePrefix 0.005 provides "rewrite" export

  =pkg Sort::ByExample

=end vim

You'll get output Pod like this:

=begin vim pod

  =head1 TASK CONTENTS

  =head2 Simple Modules (Wednesdays)

  =head3 Number::Nary 0.108

  Version 1.08 is required because: has robust unique-decodability detection

  =head3 Data Section

  =head3 String::RewritePrefix 0.005

  Version 0.005 is required because: provides "rewrite" export

  =head3 Sort::ByExample

=end vim

You'll also get all those packages, with the versions given (if any) listed as
prerequisites, so installing your task will get all those prerequisites as
well.

Have fun, make some bundles, share, and enjoy.

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [Task::BeLike::RJBS] - my box
* [Task::BeLike::BINGOS], [Task::BeLike::hanekomu], [Task::BeLike::YANICK]
* [Bundle::Ovid], [Bundle::Theory], and many more
* [Dist::Zilla::Plugin::TaskWeaver]
