Title:   59 23 24 12 * /bin/celebrate
Package: App::Cronjob

=head1 Solaris Ain't So Bad

We've been using Solaris for most of our servers for quite a while at work now,
and there's no question that it's made our sysadmin's life easier.  Everybody
wants the BOFH to be happy, but there's often this idea that Solaris will make
you, the programmer, miserable.  Given the choice between a miserable me and a
miserable sysadmin, I know which one I will pick.  After all, if worse comes to
worst, you can just replace the sysadmin with some more Perl, right?

(I'm just kidding, Bryan, you're great.)

In reality, Solaris is fine.  It almost never gets in my way, and that's
because one of the first things that happens to every new Solaris box we build
is the installation of the GNU tools.  I mean, ZFS and DTrace and zones are
great, but Solaris grep is like a trip back to 1982.  The one tool that just
wasn't quite easy enough to replace, though, was Solaris cron.  As we got more
and more servers on to Solaris, in the beginning, more and more of my C<cron>
mailbox started to look like this:

  Subject: Output from "cron" command
  Subject: Output from "cron" command
  Subject: Output from "cron" command
  Subject: Output from "cron" command
  Subject: Output from "cron" command
  Subject: Output from "cron" command
  Subject: Output from "cron" command
  Subject: Output from "cron" command

Yeah.  That's just great.  Thanks.

=head1 Keep the crond, just add more Perl

So, as I said, replacing C<crond> wasn't as simple as we wanted it to be, so
instead we wrote a wrapper and used
L<Puppet|http://reductivelabs.com/products/puppet/> to make sure that every
single cron job used it.  The wrapper is F<cronjob>, which you get when you
install L<App::Cronjob>.

You just replace "some-job" in your F<crontab> with:

  /usr/local/bin/cronjob -s 'nightly llama maintenance' -E -c some-job

By default, C<cronjob> will get a lock for the job.  Unless you tell it not to
lock, no two jobs with the same subject can be run at once.  The default
subject is the command to be run, but we've overridden it with the "C<-s>"
switch, above.  If it gets a lock, it runs the job.  Just like normal cron, it
will send you the output of the command -- but sometimes that's really
annoying, so we've used "C<-E>" to tell it to only send mail if the command
exits with an error condition.

In addition to sending you the output of the command, it will include a summary
of how the job went:

  From: "cron/lambda.example.com" <cron@lambda.example.com>
  To: root@lambda.example.com
  Date: Thu, 19 Nov 2009 03:00:09 -0500
  Subject: FAIL: nightly llama maintenance
  In-Reply-To: <73d2be0cc900096550bc3b159b4d86d4@lambda.example.com>

  Command: some-job
  Time   : 47.5708s
  Status : {{{"core": 0, "exit": 2, "signal": 0, "status": 512}}}

  Output :

  rm: cannot remove `/var/ram/foo@example_com_.3H6D8RyK': No such file or directory

We can see how long it took, what happened, and its output.  The "FAIL" in the
subject also lets us pick out jobs that failed from jobs that were merely
noisy.

Finally, see that message-id in the In-Reply-To header?  That will be the same
for every job with the same subject on the same host.  That means your cronjob
reports will form threads, and that means that you can tell C<mutt> to collapse
all your threads and skim over the different error reports and their counts,
rather than just seeing and endless stream of the same flapping service over
and over.

That's it!  App::Cronjob can help hide the pain of Solaris cron, but it isn't
just for Solaris.  After all, cron might be better on most Linux systems than
on Solaris, but its reports still can't compare with App::Cronjob's.

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [App::Cronjob]
* [crontab2english|http://interglacial.com/~sburke/pub/crontab2english.html] -
Sean M. Burke's tool for making crontab schedules readable
* [Cron|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/cron]
