Title:   Like FUSE, but Stupider
Package: Path::Resolver

=head1 From Filename to Thing

A few years ago, my coworker L<Dieter|http://blog.weftsoar.net/> and I were
working on improving the componentization of some of our internal web
applications.  We wanted it to be easier to say "put a paginated table thing
here" or "give me a link here."  We were pretty happy with
L<HTML::Widget::Factory> for low-level use, and the rest could be done with
L<Mason|HTML::Mason> components.  We just didn't like the way that you'd have
to know whether a component was a method call on a widget factory object or a
component call in Mason.  I said something like, "I wish we could make it all
look like Mason."  Totally blowing my mind for all time, Dieter said, "We can"
and L<made it happen|MasonX::Resolver::WidgetFactory>
L<seamlessly|MasonX::Resolver::Multiplex>.

The thing is that Mason's system for resolving path-like things into a
component is itself a thing that can customized or replaced.  It's the
resolver, and you can write a new one.

Many times after seeing the elegance of that solution, I wanted to be able to
replace parts of all sorts of code that expected filenames.  I looked a number
of "emulate a filesystem in Perl" libraries, but they wanted to provide all
kinds of stuff I didn't care about -- like statting deleting files.  Heck, I
just wanted an entity!

Finally my will broke and I wrote the crappiest thing I could think of that
would still work.  That was Path::Resolver version 0, and now we're up to 3.
It's still pretty stupid, and that's a feature.  The simplest use is something
like this:

  #!perl
  my $resolver = Path::Resolver::Resolver::FileSystem->new({ root => '/tmp' });
  my $content  = $resolver->entity_for('/baz/bar/quux.txt')->content;

  # or ...
  my $resolver = Path::Resolver::Resolver::Archive::Tar->new({ archive => 'foo.tar.gz' });

  # or ...
  my $resolver = Path::Resolver::Resolver::DistDir->new({ dist_name => 'Christmas-App' });

The resolver is, of course, the thing that goes from a filename to an entity.
The definition of an entity is pretty vague: it's just a thing.  Resolvers know
what kind of things they'll return, and you can give them a converter that will
expect that kind of thing and return another kind.  For example, the FileSystem
resolver resolves things to absolute filenames.  Then it can be converted to a
"SimpleEntity," which basically is just a thing with content.  The tarball
resolver produces SimpleEntities natively.  By knowing what kind of entity
things will find, and by having a means to convert them, it's easy to put
together a bunch of different kinds of resolvers and multiplex them.

=head1 Multiplexing Resolvers

Multiplexing resolvers?  It's really simple.  "Mux" resolvers just say "I have
a bunch of resolvers that all return the same kind of thing, and I have a
strategy for picking one of them."  There are two important muxers that come
with Path::Resolver: Ordered and Prefix.  The ordered resolver lets you set up
things like the C<$PATH> environment variable.  Imagine you did this:

  #!perl
  my $resolver = Path::Resolver::Resolver::Mux::Ordered->new({
    resolvers => [
      Path::Resolver::Resolver::FileSystem->new({ root => '/bin' }),
      Path::Resolver::Resolver::FileSystem->new({ root => '/usr/bin' }),
      Path::Resolver::Resolver::FileSystem->new({ root => '/usr/local/bin' }),
    ],
  });

Now you'd have something resembling the way your shell finds commands to run.
Of course, there's no reason that all the resolvers in there have to be
filesystem resolvers.  Maybe your web app installs its own templates, but they
can be overridden by the user.

  my $resolver = Path::Resolver::Resolver::Mux::Ordered->new({
    resolvers => [
      Path::Resolver::Resolver::FileSystem->new({ root => './templates' }),
      Path::Resolver::Resolver::DistDir->new({ dist_name => 'My-WebApp' }),
    ],
  });

If the file isn't found in the F<./templates> directory, we'll look in the
files we installed when your webapp was installed.

The prefix muxer is more complex.  It represents a virtual directory where each
subdirectory is handled by a different resolver.  This is used in
L<Email::MIME::Kit::KitReader::SWAK> to make
L<Email::MIME::Kit|http://advent.rjbs.manxome.org/2009-12-10.html> easer to
use.  It sets up resolvers like this:

  file.txt      - looks in the mkit directory
  /kit/file.txt - looks in the mkit directory
  /dist/My-WebApp/header.html      - looks in dist ShareDir for My-WebApp
  /fs/usr/share/common/header.html - looks in /usr on the filesystem

=head1 Putting it to Use

A nice thing about Path::Resolver is that in general, you can use it without
worrying about how it will get used later.  If you have some part of your
program that reads stuff from disk, you can just say, "Whatever, I'll use a
Path::Resolver here."  Then whenever anyone wants to make it do something wild
and crazy, it's much, much simpler for them to do so -- they just supply a new
Path::Resolver object to replace your stock FileSystem resolver.

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [Path::Resolver]
* [HTML::Mason::Resolver]
* [Email::MIME::Kit::KitReader::SWAK]
