Title:   Sorting Automatically, By Hand
Package: Sort::ByExample

=pod

Here's a nice easy one:  sorting stuff by providing a pre-sorted set of data.

The problem with custom sort functions is that sometimes it's stupidly easy to
explain how you want to sort something to a person, but once you try to explain
it to the computer, it becomes a real chore.  Here's an example:  we've got a
bunch of presents to delivery, and usually we deliver them by the destination's 
latitude, northerly destinations first, but we have a few VIP users who always
get first service.  Their presents get delivered first, then everybody else's.

  #!perl
  use Sort::ByExample qw(sbe);

  my $sorter = sbe(
    [ 'Klortho the Magnificent', 'Mrs. Claus', 'Cold Miser' ],
    {
      xform    => sub { $_[0]->recipient },
      fallback => sub { $_[3]->degrees_north <=> $_[2]->degrees_north },
    }
  );

  my @jobs = $sorter->( @presents );

Now all deliveries will be sorted by destination, but presents for our three
VIPs will be pulled out of order: first, all of Klortho's gifts (by submission
time), then Mrs. Claus's, then Cold Miser's.  The C<xform> callback is used to
perform a L<Schwartzian
transform|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schwartzian_transform>, so that the sort
routines will see the recipient's name rather than the present object.
C<fallback> provides a callback to sort items not sorted by the example, or
that have the same position in the example.  Note that the C<fallback> routine
looks at the third and fourth elements rather than the first two.  These give
it access to the value before transformation.

Finally, you can mark items as "ties" in the example sort by using a hashref as
the example:

  #!perl
  my $sorter = sbe(
    {
      'Klortho the Magnificent' => 1,
      'Mrs. Claus' => 2,
      'Cold Miser' => 3,
      'Heat Miser' => 4,
    },
    {
      xform    => sub { $_[0]->recipient },
      fallback => sub { $_[3]->degrees_north <=> $_[2]->degrees_north },
    }
  );

Sort::ByExample is not intended to be blazing fast, but it should be fairly
efficient.  It also isn't L<the Swiss Army chainsaw of
sorting|http://search.cpan.org/dist/Sort-Maker>.  I tried to use that at first
before giving up and writing this code.

Sort::ByExample solves a pretty specific problem, and one that could always be
solved by writing just a few more lines of Perl.  Still, not having to write
those lines is a pretty nice perk that leaves more time for solving the real
problem.

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [Sort::ByExample]
* [Sort::Maker]
