Title:   More Stuff I Stole from Catalyst (that they stole back)
Package: String::RewritePrefix

=head1 I Hate Typing

It's true.  The only time that I I<like> typing is when I'm playing L<Typing of
the Dead|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Typing_of_the_Dead>.  (I try to get in a
big dose of zombie video games every Yuletide; maybe I'll bring the old
Dreamcast up again this winter.)  Apart from shooting zombies by typing
quickly, typing stinks.  It hurts my hands, and I live in perpetual dread of
the day when I must find a new profession because my fingers no longer work.
That's why most of the code I write is meant to save keystrokes for when I
write I<other> code.

Catalyst lets you write something like this in your config for Holiday::Web:

  #!perl
  my $config = {
    'Model::GreetingCard' => { ... }
    'View::TextTemplate'  => { ... }
    '+Catalyst::Plugin::Kwanzaa' => { ... }
  }

The first two get rewritten to "Holiday::Web::Model::GreetingCard" and
"Holiday::Web::View::TextTemplate" respectively.  In the third, the C<+> means
that it should be used literally -- so just the plus sign is dropped.  There's
also a C<~> prefix for slightly more arcane uses.  Obviously, this can save a
lot of typing and, just as importantly, a lot of reading.  I liked this!

I really wanted to use this kind of rewriting for L<Dist::Zilla>, and to make
sure I could re-use this pattern whenever I wanted, I wrote
String::RewritePrefix.  Catalyst's behavior could be written as:

  #!perl
  use String::RewritePrefix rewrite => {
    prefixes => {
      ''  => 'Holiday::Web::',
      '+' => ''
    },
  };

That's using L<Sub::Exporter>, of course, so we can import a few rewriting
strategies:

  #!perl
  use String::RewritePrefix
    rewrite => { -as => 'holiday_px', prefix => { '' => 'Holiday::Web::', '+' => '' },
    rewrite => { -as => 'num_px',     prefix => { '-' => 'negative ', '+' => 'positive ' },
  };

  # to yield (positive 40, negative 10, positive 18, zero)
  my @numbers = num_px( qw( +40 -10 +18 0 ) );

  # to yield (Holiday::Web::Mode::GreetingCard, Holiday::Web::View::TextTemplate,
  # Catalyst::Plugin::Kwanzaa)
  my @plugins = holiday_px( qw(
    Model::GreetingCard
    View::TextTemplate
    +Catalyst::Plugin::Kwanzaa
  ));


There isn't much more to it, apart from one or two weird options.  Still, think
of all the typing and squinting you save in your config files!

The prefix rewriting in L<Catalyst::Utils>, which inspired me to write
String::RewritePrefix, now I<uses> String::RewritePrefix!  It's always a joy to
find out that other people benefit from my attempt to be lazy and type less.
It means I<they> have more time for Typing of the Dead, too.

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [String::RewritePrefix]
* [Catalyst::Utils]

