Title:   E-mail Made Simple
Package: E'Mail::Acme

=head1 Okay, I Lied

I got a decent amount of angry comments on L<Thursday's
post|http://advent.rjbs.manxome.org/2009-12-10.html> about L<Email::MIME::Kit>.
It seems people are sick of my insistance that e-mail is really complicated and
they want me to publicly admit that it's simple.

I admit it.  E-mail is pretty much just a dumped hash, then a bunch of lines,
and maybe some attached files at the end.  I've written some code to show off
how easy things can be, if you just accept that e-mail is simple.  This code is
the acme of simplicity and the acme of utility.

It doesn't use any objects or special variables or functions.  It just lets you
put data into a structured variable, and then you can send it.

=head1 E'Mail::Acme

=head2 Setting up the Header

  #!perl
  use E'Mail::Acme;

  my $e_mail = E'Mail::Acme;

  # Now we have our e-mail variable, so we can put some headers in it.
  # Headers are just a hash, remember?

  $e_mail->{From} = q<Ricardo Signes <rjbs@example.com>>;

  # ...and we can get multiple headers easily enough, just assign a few times:
  $e_mail->{To} = q<Santa Claus <santa@north-pole.mil>>;
  $e_mail->{To} = q<Kris Kringle <kk@macys.com>>;

So, easy!  The header is just a hash, like you'd expect.

=head2 Setting up the Body

The body is just a bunch of lines of text.  In other words, an array.  We can
add lines easily enough.

  #!perl
  push @$e_mail, "Dear Santa,"
               , ""
               , "Here are some things I want:"
               , @things_i_want
               , ""
               , "Please gimme."
               , ""
               , "-- "
               , "rjbs";

Great.  Of course, that looks pretty ridiculous.  Probably we wanted to just do
this:

  #!perl
  push @$e_mail, `cat /tmp/mutt-terrordome-2608-9063-429`;

And just to show that we're not limited to the world of boring "single part"
e-mails, we'll attach a little incentive.

  #!perl
  # first, we make an attachment
  my $attach = E'Mail::Acme;
  $attach->{'content-type'} = 'image/jpeg';
  push @$attach, `cat amazon-giftcert.jpg`;

  # then we attach it
  push @$e_mail, $attach;

=head2 Sending our Message

Sure, we could bring in some modern, best-practice library like Email::Send:

  #!perl
  Email::Send->new->send("$e_mail");

...but we'd just be back to these ridiculous object-oriented interface that
clutter up our simple e-mail handling.  We set up our e-mail object, and now we
want to do something with it.  There's only one thing we do with e-mail, right?
We send it!  All we have to do is tell Perl we want to do (that thing with) the
e-mail:

  #!perl
  do &$e_mail;

We could also have written C<< $e_mail->() >>, but the arrow notation
unnecessarily reminds me of objects, so I try to avoid it.

=head1 Sane, Simple, Sensisble

So, there you have it.  E-mail handling made simple and straightforward, just
like you'd like it.  Use it everywhere!

=head1 See Also

=for wikidoc
* [E'Mail::Acme]
* [Acme::|http://www.perlfoundation.org/perl5/index.cgi?acme]
